Figure Legend
Figure 1 – Combining BN-PAGE with IGX-MS.
In the first step, proteins and their assemblies are loaded and separated by BN-PAGE. The bands representing different protein assemblies are visualized after running the gel with Coomassie in the upper running buffer. The band(s) of interest are then excised from the gel and incubated with a cross-linking reagent in the cross-linking buffer. The cross-linking reaction is quenched and subsequently subjected to standard in-gel digestion. The extracted peptides are finally analyzed using cross-linking optimized parameters for the MS analysis.
Figure 2 - IGX-MS of GroEL using either DSS or DSSO at varying concentrations.
A.	E. Coli GroEL was cross-linked by IGX-MS using either DSS or DSSO at concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 5 mM. The identified cross-links were placed on the reported GroEL structure (PDB ID:1KP8), whereby the number of unique cross-linked lysine C\(\alpha\)-C\(\alpha\) distances (using the left y-axis) were binned and as shown in bars. The summed number of unique cross-links obtained at each concentration is shown in lines using the right y-axis.
B.	Cross-links obtained by IGX-MS using DSS or DSSO plotted onto one subunit of GroEL (intra-links; solid lines) (PDB ID:1KP8) and neighboring subunits (inter-links; dashed lines). Cross-links agreeing with the set distance restraint of 30 Å are colored black, links exceeding the restraint are colored red.
Data information: The presented data is summed from triplicates.
Figure 3 - Comparison of IGX-MS and in-solution XL-MS of GroEL.
A.	E.Coli GroEL was subjected to in-solution XL-MS using 0.75 mM DSS. The resulting cross-links were compared to cross-links obtained by IGX-MS using DSS (1.5 mM) or DSSO (2 mM). The Venn diagram shows the overlap in the cross-links identified. 
B.	Distribution of lysine C\(\alpha\)-C\(\alpha\) distances of unique cross-links identified by IGX-MS (DSS or DSSO) or in-solution XL-MS plotted on the GroEL structure (PDB ID:1KP8).
Data information: The presented data is summed from triplicates.
Figure 4 - Selective cross-linking of the ATP synthase monomer from bovine heart mitochondria (BHM) by IGX-MS.
A.	BN-PAGE of 20 µg solubilized BHM with several of the distinct complexes annotated. The dashed box indicates the monomeric ATP synthase (complex V) band subjected to IGX-MS. Annotation of protein bands was done following a previously published study (Wittig_2010).
B.	Unique cross-links < 30 Å identified by IGX-MS in this study (left) or by Liu_2018 (Liu_2018) using in-solution XL-MS plotted on the ATP synthase structure (PDB ID:5ARA).
C.	Circos plot of cross-linked ATP synthase subunits and the ATP synthase inhibitor (ATP5IF1) identified by IGX-MS. The position of the lysine residues is shown in the outer-ring, and cross-linked residues are colored dark orange. Orange lines represent intra-links while inter-links are colored dark gray. Thickness of the cross-link lines correlates to the number of detected cross-linked spectra matches (CSMs).
D.	Distribution of lysine C\(\alpha\)-C\(\alpha\) distances of unique cross-links identified by IGX-MS or in-solution XL-MS (Liu_2018) using DSS (1.5 mM) or DSSO (0.5 mM), respectively.
Data information: The presented IGX-MS data is summed from triplicates. For illustration, the same BN-PAGE of solubilized BHM is repeatately shown (see Figure EV1A)
 
Figure 5 - IGX-MS of the monomeric complement proteins C5 and C6, and the hetero-dimeric C5b6 complex.
A.	Cross-links of monomeric C5 (left) and from C5b incorporated in the C5b6 complex (right) plotted on the respective available structural models (PDB ID: 3CU7 and 4A5W, respectively). The red lines indicate distances >30 Å. The different domains of C5 are indicated, and C6 within the C5b6 complex is shown in grey. 
B.	Distribution of lysine C\(\alpha\)-C\(\alpha\) distances of unique cross-links identified by IGX-MS in monomeric C5 (light orange) and C5b when part of the C5b6 complex (dark orange). 
C.	Cross-links of monomeric C6 (left) and C6 incorporated in the C5b6 complex (right) plotted on the respective structural models (PDB ID: 3T5O and 4A5W, respectively). The red lines indicate distances >30 Å. The different domains of C6 are indicated, and C5b within the C5b6 complex is shown in grey.
D.	Distribution of lysine C\(\alpha\)-C\(\alpha\) distances of unique cross-links identified by IGX-MS in monomeric C6 (light red) or C6 when incoprorated within the C5b6 complex.
Data information: Only cross-links identified in at least two out of three replicates were included in the analysis.
Figure 6 - IGX-MS driven refined structural model of monomeric C6
A.	IGX-MS driven homology model of monomeric free C6 depicted in two different orientations. Black dots indicate the few missing amino acids (residue 591-619, spanning about 81 Å) covering the linker region between the main body and C5b-binding region.
B.	Superpositioning of C6 IGX-MS driven model (purple and green surface) and C6 X-ray structure (orange and blue surface; PDB ID: 3T5O). Black dots indicate the few missing amino acids (residue 591-619) covering the linker region between the main body and C5b-binding region.
C.	Contact maps with cross-linked residues (orange dots) of C6 X-ray structure (PDB ID: 3T5O, left panel) and IGX-MS driven C6 model (right panel). The colored density represents a contact relationship smaller than 40 Å of individual residues. White density represents a contact relationship bigger than 40 Å of individual residues. 
D.	Distribution of lysine C\(\alpha\)-C\(\alpha\) distances of unique cross-links identified by IGX-MS for monomeric C6 when plotted on the reported X-ray structure (pink bars, PDB ID: 3T5O) and the IGX-MS driven refined structural model (green bars). 
Data information: Only cross-links identified in at least two out of three replicates were included in the analysis.

EV Figure Legend
Figure EV1 – Assembly state specific cross-linking of Complex I from bovine heart mitochondria (BHM) in its monomeric state and when incorporated within a super-complex by IGX-MS.
A.	IGX-MS cross-links observed within monomeric complex I (left) - and when incorporated within the super complex S1 (right). Node positions are in accordance with respective subunit coordinates of the published S1 structure (PDB ID: 5GUP).
B.	Circos plots of detected cross-links within the monomeric complex I (CI) (black Gene names) identified by IGX-MS (left panel) and in-solution XL-MS (right panel). The position of the lysine residues is shown in the outer-ring, and cross-linked residues are colored dark orange. For IGX-MS generated data (left panel), cross-links are colored based on the CI assembly state they were detected for. For in-solution XL-MS (right panel) the cross-links originated from a mixture of all assembly states of CI present in-solution. Thickness of the cross-link lines correlates to the number of detected cross-linked spectra matches (CSMs).
Data information: The presented IGX-MS data is summed from triplicates. For illustration, the same BN-PAGE of solubilized BHM is repeatately shown (see Figure 4A).
Figure EV2 – Structural rearrangements of the AI and CH regions of C6 when going from free C6, the C5b6 intermediate structure to C6 in the fully assembled MAC.
A-D.	Cartoon representation of the LDL (deepcyan) and MACPF (sand) domains within the IGX-MS driven C6 model (A), C6 from the X-ray structure (PDB ID: 3T5O) (B), C6 complexed with C5b (PDB ID: 4A5W) (C), and C6 as part of the MAC (PDB ID: 6H03) (D). The regions CH 1-3 (orange, paleyellow, and yelloworange) and auto-inhibitory (AI, red) within MACPF are shown.
E.	The difference distance matrix of superposed C6-MACPF domains. The difference distance was calculated by substracting the coordinates of aligned MACPF backbones of the IGX-MS driven model and the I-tasser model (for complete sequence coverage) of C6 -X-ray structure (PDB ID: 3T5O). The distance values are plotted with colors representing C\(\alpha\) differences of -20 to 20 Å according to the right-sided scale.
F.	Overlay of the AI (composed of linchpin helix and EGF domain), CH1, and CH2 regions of MACPF in four distinct conformations of C6, namely the IGX-MS driven model (sand), the deposited C6 X-ray structure (orange), when incorporated in the C5b6 complex (red), and finally when incorporated in the fully assembled MAC (deepcyan). Arrows indicate the conformational changes of the different regions from free C6 (IGX-MS driven model) to partial activation (PDB ID: 3T5O) and C5b binding (PDB ID: 4A5W) and final assembly into the MAC (PDB ID: 6H03).
Data information: MACPF structural coordinates were obtained from indicated structures and the IGX-MS driven model.
Figure EV3 – In-solution XL-MS of C6.
A.	DSS concentration optimization for cross-linking C6 in-solution monitored by SDS-PAGE. The upper band (~200 kDa) indicates a C6 dimer that is formed upon cross-linking whereas the more abundant lower band (~100 kDa) represents monomeric C6.
B.	Obtained cross-links for monomeric C6 plotted on the available X-ray structure of C6 (PDB ID: 3T5O). The red lines indicate distances >30 Å. The different domains of C6 are indicated in black.
C.	Distribution of lysine C\(\alpha\)-C\(\alpha\) distances of unique cross-links identified by in-solution XL-MS for monomeric C6 when plotted on the reported X-ray structure (pink bars, PDB ID: 3T5O) and the IGX-MS driven refined structural model (green bars). The average distance of all cross-links is 41.7 Å when using the X-ray structure which reduces to 26.2 Å for the IGX-MS driven structural model.
Data information: Only cross-links identified in at least two of three replicates were included in the analysis.
